GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: back
on the trail.
the candidates continue their
attacks after
the debate, while Bernie Sanders
makes an
appeal to millennials to support
Clinton.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
Congress overrides President
Obama's veto
of a bill which would permit
victims' families
to sue Saudi Arabia for
involvement in the
9/11 attacks.
GWEN IFILL: And our toxic
relationship with
lead.
Miles O'Brien takes on the
science and America's
ongoing history with the
poisonous metal.
DAVID BELLINGER, Harvard Medical
School: In
most places in the U.S., we use
the children
to tell us where the lead is.
We wait for a child to be
overexposed before
there's investigation into that
child's environment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The name of the game
in the presidential
race today, momentum from Monday
night's debate.
One candidate is hoping to keep
it going and
make new inroads.
The other is looking to recover.
The University of New Hampshire
was the backdrop
for Hillary Clinton's latest
effort to win
over young voters.
She was joined by former rival
Bernie Sanders,
whose presidential campaign was
fueled in
large part by millennials
burdened by student
debt.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Going to college should be hard,
but paying
for college shouldn't be so hard
that it prevents
you from getting your education.
I don't know how we got to where
we are, but
we are going to fix it.
This is wrong.
It's wrong for students, it's
wrong for families,
and it's wrong for our country.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: First lady Michelle
Obama made
a college swing of her own today
through Pennsylvania,
campaigning for Clinton and
taking repeated
swings at Donald Trump.
MICHELLE OBAMA, FIRST LADY: If a
candidate
regularly and flippantly makes
cruel and insulting
comments about women, about how
we look, how
we act, well, sadly, that's who
that candidate
really is.
GWEN IFILL: Trump, campaigning
in the suburbs
of the Upper Midwest, rallied
his troops by
stepping up his criticisms of
Clinton.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
She disgraced the office of
secretary of state
by putting it up to sale.
And if she ever got the chance,
she would
put the Oval Office up for sale
too.
And nobody has any doubt about
it.
And we can't let that happen.
GWEN IFILL: But the campaign is
shifting in
other ways, most of them helpful
to Clinton.
In Virginia, former Senator John
Warner, a
Republican, appeared with
Clinton running
mate Tim Kaine to endorse the
Democratic ticket.
And The Arizona Republic threw
its support
behind Clinton, endorsing a
Democrat for the
first time in the newspaper's
126-year history.
There was also more fallout from
Monday's
debate.
That's when Clinton raised
Trump's criticism
of a former Miss Universe,
Alicia Machado,
her weight.
Trump defended himself Tuesday,
but Machado
called out Trump again today on
NBC.
ALICIA MACHADO, Former Miss
Universe (through
translator): That same person I
knew, I see
in each one of his speeches.
And I see it getting worse, and
I see it even
more harmful and even more
damaging.
GWEN IFILL: The campaign is now
between debates.
The next top-of-the-ticket
face-off number
is set for October 9.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Congress
averted a crisis over funding
the government
past Friday.
The Senate easily approved a
bill to keep
things running into December,
and the House
moved to follow suit.
The stalemate ended after House
leaders compromised
on helping Flint, Michigan, with
its lead-tainted
water.
GWEN IFILL: The report is in on
the downing
of a Malaysia Airlines plane
over Eastern
Ukraine two years ago.
An international investigation,
led by the
Dutch, announced the findings
today.
Jonathan Miller of Independent
Television
News reports.
JONATHAN MILLER: Bodies and
baggage and wreckage
were scattered over 50 square
kilometers when
the Malaysian 777-200, en route
from Amsterdam
to Kuala Lumpur, disintegrated
at 33,000 feet.
The answers as to the how, who
and why have
been fought over ever since.
Now we know the how for sure.
MAN: We have no doubt about the
correctness
of the conclusions that we
present today.
And the conclusion is that on
the 17th July
2014, flight MH17 was brought
down with a
BUK rocket that was launched
from farmland
at Pervomaisk and that the
missile system
arrived from the Russian
Federation, and was
returned there afterwards.
JONATHAN MILLER: They presented
videos of
the missile system entering the
Russian-backed
separatist region east of
Donetsk, four BUK
missiles on board.
Then there was film of the
low-loader leaving,
heading back into Russia later
the same day
with only three missiles, the
journey reconstructed
with computer graphics.
Here, triangulated evidence from
photographs
of smoke trails taken by two
different witnesses,
pointing to this charred corner
of a field,
the launch site.
They translated and transcribed
mobile phone
intercepts in which rebel
fighters give the
convoy directions.
Today, Russia fired back,
unleashing a barrage
of denials, the international
channel Russia
Today, widely seen as
pro-Kremlin, citing
doubts about most of the
findings, the Kremlin
insisting Ukraine is to blame.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Afghanistan,
local officials
say a U.S. airstrike killed 13
civilians early
today.
The target appeared to be
Islamic State loyalists.
The attack struck a residential
building in
Nangarhar Province in the east.
The U.S. military said it is
investigating
the report of civilian
casualties.
GWEN IFILL: The United States is
sending another
615 troops to Iraq, adding to
4,500 already
there.
It is part of an ongoing buildup
to battle
Islamic State forces and to
recapture the
city of Mosul.
The U.S. units are officially in
a support
role and are not to take a
direct hand in
combat, unless attacked.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Protesters
gathered overnight
in El Cajon, California, after
the fatal police
shooting of a Ugandan man.
Police said that he was behaving
erratically.
His sister said he is mentally
ill.
A cell phone image showed him by
a white truck,
apparently in a shooting stance,
and pointing
something, before he was shot.
It turned out, later, though,
that he didn't
have a gun.
GWEN IFILL: In economic news,
Federal Reserve
Chair Janet Yellen reaffirmed
there is no
fixed timetable for raising
interest rates
again.
but she told a House hearing she
believes
the economy will be ready for a
rate hike
before the year is out.
JANET YELLEN, Federal Reserve
Chair: Many
of my colleagues indicated in
their recent
projections, the majority, that
they would
see it as appropriate to make a
move to take
a step in that direction this
year if things
continue on the current path and
no significant
new risks arise.
GWEN IFILL: The Fed's next
policy meeting
is in early November, just
before the election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The oil cartel,
OPEC, has agreed
on cutting output for the first
time since
2008.
It is a bid to push up prices,
and member
states said today that they will
finalize
the details at a meeting in
November.
In response, prices jumped $2 a
barrel today.
GWEN IFILL: That oil surge
helped energy stocks
in particular, and Wall Street
in general.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained nearly
111 points to close at 18339.
The Nasdaq rose almost 13
points, and the
S&P 500 added 11.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a first veto
override for President Obama;
the legacy of
one of Israel's founding
fathers; how lead
became so pervasive in our
infrastructure;
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the votes
today on Capitol
Hill to override for the first
time the veto
of a bill by President Obama --
the issue,
permitting lawsuits against
governments that
support terrorist acts inside
the United States,
one government in particular.
MAN: The bill, on
reconsideration, is passed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was a rare
show of unity.
Senators voted 97-1 to override
the president's
veto, with Minority Leader Harry
Reid the
lone holdout.
The bill permits families of
9/11 victims
to sue Saudi Arabia over its
alleged support
of the 19 hijackers, most of
whom were Saudis.
SEN.
JOHN CORNYN (R), Texas: How can
anyone look
at the families in the eye and
tell them that
they shouldn't have the
opportunity to seek
justice against a foreign
government responsible
for the death of their loved
one?
SEN.
CHARLES SCHUMER (D), New York:
It's very simple.
If the Saudis were culpable,
they should be
held accountable.
If they had nothing to do with
9/11, they
have nothing to fear.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The attack left
nearly 3,000
people dead, and the Saudis have
long rejected
any claim they were involved.
Their foreign minister spoke
this past July,
after Congress released a
long-classified
section of the official U.S.
government report
on the 9/11 attacks.
ADEL AL-JUBEIR, Saudi Arabian
Foreign Minister:
The CIA director, the director
of national
intelligence, came out and said
that there
was no involvement of the Saudi
government
or Saudi officials in the events
of 9/11.
The Senate Intelligence
Committee did its
own investigation, came to the
same conclusion.
And so the matter is now
finished.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Saudis also
strongly opposed
this lawsuit bill.
President Obama warned it could
strain relations
with Riyadh and spur retaliation
against Americans
elsewhere.
In his veto message to Congress
on Friday,
the president said: "The bill
doesn't enhance
the safety of Americans from
terrorist attacks,
and undermines core U.S.
interests."
Defense Secretary Ash Carter
also wrote to
Congress, predicting potentially
devastating
consequences for American troops
abroad.
But supporters largely dismissed
those fears,
and the House joined the Senate
this afternoon
overwhelmingly rejecting the
president's veto.
President Obama called the vote
a mistake
and warned that it sets a
dangerous precedent.
We get two views now.
Jack Quinn is a lawyer
representing more than
2,000 families who were impacted
by the attacks
on 9/11 and who are suing Saudi
Arabia.
He was also White House counsel
during the
Bill Clinton administration.
And Michael Mukasey, he was
attorney general
of the United States during the
George W.
Bush administration.
And we welcome both of you.
Jack Quinn, let me start with
you.
Why do these families believe
the government
of Saudi Arabia should be
subject to lawsuits?
JACK QUINN, Attorney
Representing 9/11 Families:
Well, they think that any
government that
-- with respect to which there
is credible
evidence of governmental
involvement in a
terrorist attack should be held
accountable
in the United States.
That's all JASTA does.
It says...
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's the name
of the bill.
JACK QUINN: I'm sorry.
The Justice Against Sponsors of
Terrorism
Act says, quite simply, that if
a government,
sovereign government, aids and
abets a terrorist
attack inside the United States
that causes
death or injury in the United
States, then
the courts of this country have
jurisdiction
over that government.
I think if you ask most people
in the street,
should that be the law, they
would be shocked
that it's not.
And for a long time, frankly, it
was.
The administration which General
Mukasey served,
the Bush administration, went
into court and
said that the Foreign Sovereign
Immunities
Act would allow suits for
terrorist attacks
in the United States like 9/11.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael Mukasey,
it sounds
like a reasonable request that
these families
are making.
MICHAEL MUKASEY, Former U.S.
Attorney General:
Yes, it sounds reasonable.
But if you look at it closely,
it isn't.
First of all, I don't think
anybody disputes
that the families deserve not
only sympathy,
but recompense and compensation
to the extent
that these losses can be
compensated.
And they can't.
But this bill doesn't do it,
doesn't do it,
for at least two reasons.
Number one, there have been not
one, not two,
not three, but at least four
investigations
by national security officials
in the United
States, by the CIA, the FBI, and
the 9/11
Commission that found, directly
concluded
that there was no Saudi
government involvement
or involvement by high Saudi
officials in
9/11.
That has been investigated and
reinvestigated.
So, there is simply no evidence
there to show
Saudi involvement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me just stop
you right
there.
MICHAEL MUKASEY: It's also
counterintuitive
that there would be, because
Osama bin Laden,
when he was listing his reasons
for 9/11,
said that the presence of U.S.
troops in the
Arabian Peninsula was a
principal reason.
They were there at the
invitation of the United
States.
He was trying to overthrow the
Saudi government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what
evidence...
MICHAEL MUKASEY: It's completely
counterintuitive
that they would participate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jack Quinn, so,
what is the
evidence that the families, that
you are basing
this on?
JACK QUINN: Well, I want to
start by saying
what the judge just said is
flatly untrue.
Those investigations concluded
no such thing.
In fact, the 9/11 Commission
report itself,
in a very carefully constructed
sentence,
that -- said, although there was
not evidence
-- that it had not found
evidence of official
Saudi government involvement, it
conceded
that it was likely that there
was involvement
in terms of people associated
with the government
and charities sponsored by the
governments
that had provided funds to the
terrorist organization
al-Qaida that was behind the
9/11 attack.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But why not sue
those individuals
or those charitable
organizations, rather
than the government?
JACK QUINN: They are sued.
But the government is
responsible because,
we allege, there were officials
of the government
that participated in the
provision of those
finances to the hijackers.
The story is, frankly, quite
shocking.
And 9/11 commissioners former
Senator Bob
Kerrey, former Congressman Tim
Roemer, former
Navy Secretary John Lehman
completely dispute
what the judge just said about
the import
of the 9/11 Commission report.
But, look, whether I'm right or
he's right,
the Congress has completely
rejected this
argument that the families
shouldn't have
their day in court.
It is now the law of the land.
They will have their day in
court.
And, as Senator Schumer said, if
the Saudis
are completely innocent of any
responsibility
here, they will do just fine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Mukasey, what
about that
point, that if the Saudis -- if
there is not
-- if it turns out that there is
no proof
that the Saudi government or
anyone associated
with the Saudi government was
involved, why
not let this go forward?
MICHAEL MUKASEY: A couple
reasons.
First of all, as -- I don't know
whether you
know this or not, but all a
party has to do
in order to have a lawsuit go
forward is make
allegations, claims in a
complaint.
If that survives a motion to
dismiss -- and
crafty lawyers can file a
complaint that will
survive a motion to dismiss --
then they get
into what's called discovery,
meaning they
can riffle through the files, in
this case,
of the Saudi government, depose
witnesses
of the Saudi government, make
them disclose
national secrets.
There is no sovereign government
in the world
that would ever participate in
an exercise
like that.
We certainly wouldn't.
And it's inconceivable that the
Saudis would.
So, and, again, it's a situation
where essentially
they're blackmailed into writing
a check.
Plenty of governments have
indicated that
-- go ahead.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was going to
say, let Mr.
Quinn respond to that.
(CROSSTALK)
JACK QUINN: Yes, again, that was
entirely
incorrect.
The judge should know this, that
a foreign
government has an immunity to
protect its
state secrets and sensitive
classified information.
That is a fact.
And what he describes as being
able to bring
a lawsuit by making allegations
and going
to court, that's the American
system of justice,
and that's the system of justice
that's been
denied to the 9/11 families.
The Congress has now
overwhelmingly said these
citizens deserve that justice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael Mukasey,
you and others
who oppose this are concerned
about the precedent.
What is the dangerous precedent
that you're
concerned about?
MICHAEL MUKASEY: There have been
other countries
-- there have been parties in
who have tried to get at
government officials
and at soldiers in places as
diverse as Belgium
and Italy.
There was an attempt to get
Secretary Rumsfeld
charged in Belgium.
There have been attempts to get
U.S. soldiers
charged in Italy.
This is the sort of thing that
sovereign immunity
was meant to prevent.
We are the most present nation
in the world.
We have more people in more
countries in the
world than anybody else, more
soldiers, more
diplomats, more intelligence
gatherers.
Every one of them is going to
have a target
on his back after this
legislation, because
people have been trying to
curtail our activities
by going after those people.
And now they will have a good
excuse for doing
it.
And the notion that somehow --
the notion
that somehow they would simply
go after the
U.S. government is absurd.
This isn't going to be tit for
tat.
It's going to be a rat-a-tat-tat
for tat,
and we're going to be on the
wrong end of
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
10 seconds,
response.
JACK QUINN: You know, if a
driver from the
Saudi Embassy runs you over on
your way home
tonight, you are allowed to sue
that person.
Why in heaven's name would
American justice
allow a lawsuit in that
circumstance, but
not to the families of 3,000
murdered Americans?
JUDY WOODRUFF: We thank you
both.
MICHAEL MUKASEY: You're not
talking about
suing a person.
You're talking about suing
government.
JACK QUINN: Correct in both
cases.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael Mukasey
-- Michael
Mukasey and Jack Quinn, we thank
you both.
JACK QUINN: Thank you so much.
GWEN IFILL: The rapid
deterioration of the
situation in Aleppo, Syria,
accelerated today.
GWEN IFILL: The rapid
deterioration of the
situation in Aleppo, Syria,
accelerated today.
Two hospitals were bombed, among
dozens of
other targets.
UNICEF reports that nearly 100
children are
among the hundreds killed since
last Friday.
And harsh words resumed at the
United Nations,
as the U.S. threatened to cut
off all cooperation
with Russia over Syria.
Hari Sreenivasan reports.
And a warning: Images in this
story may disturb
some viewers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Blood mingled
with fresh
bread on the streets of East
Aleppo, the remains
of a bakery, and its customers,
struck this
morning amid the ongoing,
thunderous bombardment.
In the terrible stillness after
the attack,
a medical worker told of the
carnage.
MAN (through translator): The
Russian planes
started dropping missiles and
rockets.
People who were coming to get
bread from the
bakery were martyred.
There are a number we cannot
reach due to
the number of shells that were
dropped.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, nearby,
two hospitals
referred to by code names M2 and
M10 to hide
their locations were also hit.
They are supported by the
Syrian-American
Medical Society, an NGO.
On a social media chat group
monitored by
the "NewsHour," medical
personnel and activists
said only six hospitals remain
operational.
Those six hospitals serve a
quarter-of-a-million
people.
Now just two of them can perform
surgery.
A worker at one hospital gave a
guided video
tour of the destruction.
MAN (through translator): At
4:00 this morning,
the barrel bombs surprised us.
This is where they landed, a
total targeting,
major damage here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Activists say
that, in the
last eight days, there have been
1,700 airstrikes,
and at least 400 people killed.
The onslaught triggered new
condemnation at
the U.N. Security Council today.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon
leveled his
harshest judgment to date,
blaming Russia
and the Assad regime in all but
name.
BAN KI-MOON, United Nations
Secretary-General:
They know they are committing
war crimes.
Imagine a slaughterhouse.
This is worse.
Even a slaughterhouse is more
humane.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Russia's
deputy envoy said
the scenes from Aleppo were the
work of rebel
propagandists.
EVGENY ZAGAYNOV, Russian Deputy
Ambassador
to the United Nations (through
translator):
We call for a rejection of
provocative rhetoric
and to focus all of our
attention and forces
on bringing an end to conflict
in Syria.
And we have a very good basis
for this based
in Russian-American cooperation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But that
cooperation, already
tenuous, may be ending.
Today, Secretary of State Kerry
told Foreign
Minister Sergei Lavrov in a
phone call that
the U.S. holds Russia
responsible, and will
cease cooperation with Moscow on
Syria if
the bombing doesn't stop.
Lavrov said it's the U.S. that
must do more.
The western government-
controlled sectors
of Aleppo, where more than a
million Syrians
live, do come under attack from
rebels, but
nothing on the scale of what's
happening in
the east.
Syrian army ground units have
now progressed
into the rebel-held sectors.
Syrian state TV showed its
forces fighting
yesterday in a central area.
MAN (through translator): We
entered Farafrah
District and broke the first
defense line
of the armed terrorist groups in
the area.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Breaking those
lines also
means breaking the people who
live there with
strikes from above.
The vast majority are trapped
civilians.
This video, also filmed
yesterday, is of the
crushing aftermath of a bombing
and a father
retrieving his lifeless son.
Those screams echoed within the
sanctums of
the Vatican today, compelling
Pope Francis
to warn of a higher judgment
that awaits the
bombers of Aleppo.
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church (through
translator): I make an appeal to
conscience
of those who are responsible for
the bombings,
who will one day will have to
face the judgment
of God.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That reckoning
is still
to come.
But, for now, no more horrendous
sense of
the sheer despair can be found
than in the
panicked cries of this man
filmed by the BBC.
His name is Mohammed Janidi, and
he calls
out for his son Husam lying in a
body bag
to get up.
As the body is taken away,
Mohammed is heard
to say: "His mother is going to
go crazy.
She will go crazy."
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of Israel's
founding fathers
died last night.
Shimon Peres was present at the
country's
very beginning, and served in
just about every
high-level office in the Jewish
state.
William Brangham has this
remembrance.
We invite Shimon Peres to come
up.
MAN: Shimon Peres to come to the
rostrum to
receive the gold medal.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It was a
moment of great
promise, Shimon Peres, then the
Israeli foreign
minister, accepting the Nobel
Peace Prize
in 1994, along with Israeli
Prime Minister
Yitzhak Rabin and Palestinian
leader Yasser
Arafat.
Peres had helped negotiate the
so-called Oslo
Accords.
And, accepting the award, he
spoke of his
hopes for a new Middle East.
SHIMON PERES, Israeli Foreign
Minister: A
Middle East without wars,
without enemies,
without ballistic missiles,
without nuclear
warheads.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Born in
present-day Belarus,
Shimon Peres was a boy when his
family emigrated
to Tel Aviv in 1934.
He joined the Jewish resistance
in the 1948
war of independence, and became
a protege
of David Ben-Gurion, Israel's
very first prime
minister.
He went on to hold numerous top
defense jobs,
helping build the Jewish state's
military
and its top-secret nuclear
weapons program.
With Ben-Gurion's backing, Peres
won a seat
in the Israeli Parliament in
1959, launching
a political career that extended
for over
five decades.
As defense minister under prime
minister Yitzhak
Rabin, he oversaw the dramatic
1976 rescue
of Israeli hostages at Entebbe
Airport in
Uganda.
Peres himself went on to serve
as prime minister,
first in 1977, and again as part
of a unity
government in 1984.
He took a conciliatory stance
toward the Palestinians,
and later, with Rabin back in
power, he conducted
the Oslo negotiations in secret.
The resulting deal, signed in
1993 in Washington,
aimed at establishing mutual
recognition between
Israel and the Palestinians and
setting them
on a path toward peace.
SHIMON PERES: From this green,
promising lawn
of the White House, let's say
together in
the language of our Bible,
peace, peace to
him that is far off, and to him
that is near.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Just two years
later, Rabin
was assassinated by a Jewish
extremist, and
Peres again became acting prime
minister for
a time.
But amid renewed confrontation
with the Palestinians,
a harder-line Israeli government
took power,
led by Benjamin Netanyahu.
The conflict soon deepened, and
the second
Palestinian intifada, or
uprising, erupted.
In early 2002, as the fighting
began to peak,
Peres, who was again serving as
foreign minister,
sat for an interview with the
"NewsHour."
SHIMON PERES: It's very hard
upon us, and
even our eyes are full of tears.
But the Palestinians are killing
their political
existence.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Still, Peres
continued advocating
for peace after his 2007
election as president,
which, in Israel, is a largely
ceremonial
role.
Shimon Peres left Israeli
politics for good
in 2014.
In recent weeks, he suffered a
stroke that
finally took his life.
Prime Minister Netanyahu
reflected today on
their long, sometimes
contentious relationship.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, Israeli
Prime Minister
(through translator): We had
disagreements,
but, even in those cases, the
respect I had
for Shimon was never affected in
any way.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Palestinian
President Mahmoud
Abbas called Peres a partner,
one who strived
to find a just peace.
Shimon Peres was 93 years old.
Joining me now to help us
understand more
about Peres' life and the legacy
is a man
who knew him well, journalist
and New York
Times columnist Thomas Friedman.
Welcome.
THOMAS FRIEDMAN, The New York
Times: Thank
you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You knew the
man.
You traveled with him.
He was your friend.
Tell us a little bit about the
man you knew.
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: Well, I think
the thing that
stands out about Peres most from
other Middle
East leaders who I have covered
over the years
is that, at the end of his days,
as he grew
older, he could stand in another
man's shoes,
another woman's shoes.
That's very unusual in the
Middle East.
The iron rule of Middle East
politics, William,
is, I'm weak, how can I
compromise?
I'm strong, why should I
Rarely do you get a leader who
actually said,
maybe we could actually find a
middle ground.
And as he grew older as a
statesman, Peres
was that person.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Help me
understand what,
to my mind, seems something of a
contradiction.
This is a man who spent the
early part of
his life building Israel
military, its weapons
programs, its settlements, its
defenses, and
then spends the last half of his
life trying
to promote peace and, in
essence, not have
to use those weapons.
Is that a contradiction, or is
that just progression?
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: Well, I think
he came to
realize that, in that part of
the world, it's
so easy to keep letting the past
bury the
future.
And I think, after doing that
for enough years
-- he was really in politics,
you know, for
70 years of his life.
He saw the military solution on
both sides
fail and fail and fail.
He decided to see if he could
get the future
to bury the past.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We saw
Netanyahu and Abbas
both speak very movingly of him
after he died.
But the bitter truth is that we
are a very,
very long way from a two-state
solution or
any peace process.
From the Palestinian point of
view, what does
his legacy look like to them?
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: Well, from the
Palestinian
point of view, Peres was a
defense minister.
He helped Israel win the 48 war.
He helped as a young man.
But then, in '56, he was
actually part of
the British-French takeover of
the Sinai.
He was one of the, frankly,
promoters early
of the settlement movement in
the West Bank,
and lost control of it, and
eventually turned
against it.
He wasn't a dove, from the
Palestinian point
of view.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Given all of
that, given
that he sort of created the germ
that, in
essence, is the irritant of the
peace process
now, how did he reconcile that
later in his
life?
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: Well, he was a
believer in
the right of the Jewish people
to stay in
their ancestral homeland.
He wasn't a dove in that sense.
But he also understood that the
Jews would
never be at home, never be able
to take their
shoes off unless Palestinians
could as well
in a two-state solution that
would grant them
a state as well.
So, that's where he was at the
end of his
life.
You know, he spent the early
part of his life
building walls and really
believed that they
were essential to protect and
defend the enterprise
of the Jewish state.
But, at the end, I think he came
to realize
that it was only webs, only an
integration
of Israel into the region that
was going to
ultimately make it secure.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Given that he
was one of
the founding fathers really of
-- for the
first century of Israel's
existence, he was
there.
Where does he fit, and where
does his legacy
fit into Israel today?
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: Well, you know,
there was
something about Peres and his
generation.
There was something big about
all those people,
and, on the Palestinian side,
Arafat as well.
And what you feel today,
William, is that
there is just nobody that big
anymore, and,
because there is nobody that big
anymore,
very hard for anyone to make big
compromises.
We're in the age of incremental
movement,
at best.
But the titans that started this
conflict,
that pursued it, that fought
each other all
those years, they have now all
passed from
the scene.
And, therefore, we're kind of
missing anyone
who could really call it quits.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Thomas Friedman
of The New York Times, thank you
so much.
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: My pleasure.
GWEN IFILL: Now the risks of
lead exposure,
particularly for children.
After some debate, Congress
appears poised
to provide special aid to Flint,
Michigan,
and possibly other cities with
lead in their
water.
Our science correspondent, Miles
O'Brien,
looks at why lead was used for
so long in
so many places, and the health
concerns, part
of our weekly series on the
Leading Edge of
science and technology.
RICHARD TRETHEWEY, Plumber: My
great-grandfather
would be quite proud right now.
MILES O'BRIEN: But he also might
be a little
worried, because
fourth-generation plumber
Richard Trethewey is showing me
the technique
for molding, shaping and joining
pipe made
of lead.
We met in the cellar of the
latest renovation
project for the venerable PBS
series "This
Old House."
It's a 1909 arts and crafts home
in Arlington,
Massachusetts.
MAN: Let's get started by
talking with Rich
Trethewey, the plumber.
Come on in.
MILES O'BRIEN: Trethewey has
been part of
this famous band of TV
renovators since the
show debuted in 1979.
RICHARD TRETHEWEY: So, in 1909,
this was high
living, because you had a
basement laundry.
MILES O'BRIEN: He fired up a
burner and put
some lead in a pot to do some
plumbing the
old-fashioned way.
RICHARD TRETHEWEY: When this
house was plumbed,
that lead pot would've been
going all day
long.
MILES O'BRIEN: In those days,
pipes were not
mass-produced, but rather
custom-tailored
on the work site.
RICHARD TRETHEWEY: So, you could
take sheets
of lead and you could shape it
into all sorts
of things you need.
You could shape it into a round
pipe.
The nice thing about it was, it
was a relatively
low melting point.
MILES O'BRIEN: Lead melts at
about 620 degrees
Fahrenheit, and it holds heat,
so it's easy
to mold, a lead pipe cinch.
It is a work of art in a way.
RICHARD TRETHEWEY: I guess so.
I guess so.
It will kill you, but it's a
work of art.
(LAUGHTER)
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes.
There is that little detail.
Our love/hate relationship with
the element
lead is as old as history
itself.
The Romans used lead pipes to
carry water
from the aqueducts into their
homes.
In fact, the word plumbing comes
from the
Latin word for lead, plumbum.
Even then, the Romans knew high
exposure to
lead was dangerous.
The ancient physician
Dioscorides once wrote:
"Lead makes the mind give way."
But, for centuries, no one knew
the consequences
of low doses of lead.
That changed in the 1970s,
thanks to this
man.
Pediatrician and child
psychiatrist Herbert
Needleman conducted a series of
studies measuring
lead in children's teeth.
He published the first evidence
that even
relatively low lead exposure can
reduce I.Q.s,
shorten attention spans, delay
language proficiency
and cause behavioral problems.
DR.
HERBERT NEEDLEMAN, Pediatrician:
There is
a broad consensus on the part of
everybody,
except the lead industry and its
spokesmen,
that lead is extremely toxic at
extremely
low doses.
MILES O'BRIEN: Up until the
mid-20th century,
lead was mined and manufactured
for all kinds
of things besides plumbing.
Most notably, it was used for
decades as an
additive to gasoline and paint.
In the bad old days, the average
lead level
in American children was high.
In 1976, it was 15 micrograms
per deciliter.
But as lead was banned in
consumer products,
that number dropped
precipitously.
It is now about one microgram
per deciliter,
a decrease of more than 90
percent.
DAVID BELLINGER, Harvard Medical
School: It's
remarkable.
It's a great public health
achievement.
But what we now know is that the
job isn't
finished.
MILES O'BRIEN: Epidemiologist
David Bellinger
is a professor of neurology at
Harvard Medical
School.
DAVID BELLINGER: In most places
in the U.S.,
we use the children to tell us
where the lead
is.
We wait for a child to be
overexposed before
there's investigation into that
child's environment.
MILES O'BRIEN: Lead persists in
the soil near
busy highways or smelters, in
old, flaking
paint, and also in vintage
plumbing still
in use, as we discovered in
Flint, Michigan.
DAVID BELLINGER: There are
tremendous reservoirs
of lead remaining in the
environment as legacy
of those past heavy uses.
And those sources of lead, we
can come in
contact with remarkably easily.
MILES O'BRIEN: When lead gets in
our system,
it becomes an impostor.
It is similar enough to calcium
that our bodies
get tricked, so cells seeking
that essential
element take on lead instead.
DAVID BELLINGER: It's really a
global assault
on multiple organ systems at
multiple levels.
It's just a really bad actor.
MILES O'BRIEN: Especially for
children.
They absorb more lead than
adults and are
much more likely to be harmed by
it, because
their brains are still in
development.
DAVID BELLINGER: It introduces
noise into
the system, so the brain is not
working as
efficiently as it would in the
absence of
lead.
The consensus now by multiple
authoritative
international bodies is, there
is no safe
level of lead.
MILES O'BRIEN: An estimated 10
million U.S.
homes are still connected to the
water main
with an old lead pipe, usually
buried under
the front yard.
It's bad, but it could be worse.
Over time, other metals in the
water interact
with the lead, creating a
barrier between
the pipe and the water, so it
can flow through
without becoming contaminated
with lead.
RICHARD TRETHEWEY: So you can
see the layer,
the coating on the inside right
here.
That's the dissolved oxygen.
And where it's shiny is where
it's going to
leach.
So, where I cut it, you can see
it's leaching.
MILES O'BRIEN: To ensure that
barrier is not
washed away, municipalities
usually add an
anti-corrosive chemical to the
water.
In Flint, they stopped doing
that when they
changed water sources.
The water gradually ate away the
protective
barrier.
RICHARD TRETHEWEY: It broke down
that inner
layer.
So, here, it was perfectly
encased, and all
the lead wasn't going to leach.
And now you change what happens
inside with
either chlorine or fluorides or
some sort
of change on the water
chemistry, and now
that inner coating is gone, and
now it becomes
really deadly.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, how would you
know if your
home was connected to the water
main with
lead pipes?
Richard Trethewey says you need
to find the
where the service comes in and
look for the
distinctive gray color.
RICHARD TRETHEWEY: It's a soft,
formable pipe,
and you will really get -- by
eye, you will
be able to tell it.
MILES O'BRIEN: If you see it,
have your water
tested right away.
While the mineral liner might be
enough to
protect your water, the safest
long-term solution
is to get the lead out.
Digging up and replacing it is
neither cheap
nor easy, but the alternative is
a huge health
risk to children that will
persist for generations
to come.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Arlington,
Massachusetts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nearly a decade
after the great
recession, the pace of creating
a new business
is still slower than it was back
in 2007.
A new report finds a small
uptick this year,
including in the U.S.
When it comes to tech start-ups,
the image
is often of young white men in
hoodies, but
it turns out African-American
women control
about 1.3 million businesses,
and they are
the country's fastest growing
group of entrepreneurs.
Special correspondent April
Brown recently
met two women trying to break
into the club.
ZOLA BOWIE, Caregiver: I love
peanut butter.
APRIL BROWN: Zola Bowie works as
a caregiver
in the San Francisco Bay Area
for a company
called Oneva.
She often can be found watching
the Santos
family's three kids, who are all
under the
age of 4.
The children's mother, Arlene
Santos, says
she couldn't run her tech
company without
the help.
ARLENE SANTOS, Oneva Client: As
a career woman,
you don't want to feel guilty
that you have
a meeting.
You want to make sure that home
life is taken
care of.
And that's really what Oneva
does.
APRIL BROWN: Marvie Jean Darden,
who also
lives in the Bay Area, had a
stroke two years
ago and is nearly blind.
But she wants to remain in her
home as long
as possible.
MARVIE JEAN DARDEN, Oneva
Client: After I
had the stroke, I couldn't do
what I had done
before.
I also worried about different
people that
we didn't know coming in to the
home and everything.
APRIL BROWN: But since Oneva
introduced Mrs.
Darden to Seadawn Thomas (ph)
those problems
have been solved.
MARVIE JEAN DARDEN: She's more
than a caregiver.
You know, I feel like she's a
friend.
APRIL BROWN: Several of Mrs.
Darden's adult
children live nearby, but have
busy lives
and children of their own.
Anita Darden Gardyne is one of
them, and part
of the so-called sandwich
generation, with
elder and child care needs.
She has an 11-year old daughter,
and Marvie
Jean is her mother.
Gardyne realized many others had
the same
issues, so, in 2014, she came up
with the
idea for Oneva, a service
providing FBI-background-checked
care providers that customers
can learn more
about before they ever enter the
home.
ZOLA BOWIE: Well, I'm Zola.
And I'm an Oneva caregiver.
APRIL BROWN: Gardyne's business
currently
provides helpers for her
parents, the Santoses
and 60 other clients.
But being an African-American
woman entrepreneur
is not without its challenges.
ANITA DARDEN GARDYNE,
Co-Founder, Oneva: Our
biggest challenge is cash.
We have to turn stones that some
folks don't
have to.
I mean, in all candor, I don't
-- I don't
have the hoodie, and I'm not the
20-something
that most people expect to see
or would want
to invest in when you think
about who in Silicon
Valley is most likely to be able
to secure
that investment.
APRIL BROWN: At a 2015 start-up
competition,
Gardyne was about to make a
pitch for Oneva,
when a potential investor turned
to her husband,
Bob, Oneva's chief technology
officer, and
another business partner.
ANITA DARDEN GARDYNE: He just
looked at them
and the two men and said, you're
going to
let the black girl pitch?
And that one floored me.
APRIL BROWN: What was going
through your head?
ANITA DARDEN GARDYNE: I was
angry.
I literally had to remove
myself.
You certainly believe, as a
woman, you have
done all the appropriate things
that one needs
to do to be competitive as a
CEO, and it's
disappointing when all that work
is culminating
in someone minimizing you as
just a black
girl.
APRIL BROWN: Gardyne ended up
winning the
competition and being named best
start-up
of 2015.
Nevertheless, she's had a tough
time getting
the attention of venture
capitalists, or V.C.s.
So, Gardyne is seeking
alternative funding
sources, like Kiva, the
crowdfunding site
that lets people invest in the
company for
as little as $25.
MAN: So, when we actually lend
to Anita or
lend to Oneva, they will
actually do it through
a PayPal account.
APRIL BROWN: The goal, $10,000.
CANDIDA BRUSH, Babson College:
Across the
board, women start businesses
with less money
than men, whether they are in
technology or
whether they are in consumer
products or whatever.
It is about half, 50 percent.
This is a worldwide statistic.
APRIL BROWN: Candida Brush is
professor of
entrepreneurship at Babson
College near Boston.
She says Gardyne's financial
struggle is not
unique.
CANDIDA BRUSH: For
minority-owned businesses,
so female-owned, black-owned
firms, start
with half the money of
male-black-owned firms.
And all minorities start with
less than money
than non-black firms.
So, it's a challenge.
APRIL BROWN: V.C.s generally
don't look like
me, from a racial perspective or
a gender
perspective.
I think that we're seeing that
change, particularly
because of changing
demographics.
Millennials, especially
millennial women,
are crashing through ceilings in
ways that
my generation wasn't always able
to.
So, certainly, I'm optimistic
about the future.
APRIL BROWN: Angel Rich is one
of those millennials
trying to break through the
glass ceiling,
not only for African-American
women entrepreneurs,
but for game developers.
She started a Washington, D.C.-
based company
called The Wealth Factory, which
recently
developed a free gaming app
called Credit
Stacker.
ANGEL RICH, Founder, The Wealth
Factory: We
want kids like you to know
exactly what to
do with their money before they
actually have
the chance to spend it.
Credit Stacker teaches people
how to make
wise credit decisions.
Essentially, you have to swap
various pieces
around that represent monthly
payments.
So, you have your home loan,
your student
loans, your car loans and so
forth.
Ah, we have another
multiple-choice question.
There's also a credit score that
calculates
as your score.
And there's multiple-choice
questions built
in to assess your knowledge
along the way.
APRIL BROWN: And why a game?
ANGEL RICH: We feel as though a
game almost
tricks people into having fun,
and they end
up learning how to manage their
money at the
same time.
APRIL BROWN: And as for money
for her own
start-up?
ANGEL RICH: We were honored to
recently be
the global winner of J.P. Morgan
Chase financial
inclusion competition for the
best solution
in the world for serving
vulnerable populations.
They provided us with a $10,000
grant to turn
our online version into the
mobile app.
APRIL BROWN: Winning a $10,000
grant to help
improve the financial literacy
of students
and families in underserved
communities does
help.
However:
ANGEL RICH: Funding is
definitely an issue
for use.
We have been very creative at
bootstrapping
this company off of revenue
since 2014.
APRIL BROWN: What is
bootstrapping, for those
who don't know?
ANGEL RICH: So, bootstrapping
essentially
means operating with no cash.
You have to become very creative
as to how
you come up with things.
So, for instance, we brought on
15 recent
graduates, gave them work
experience to develop
the game and job
recommendations, and, in
turn, we were able to develop
our game for
free.
CANDIDA BRUSH: And what we find
is that women
tend to be more resourceful and
they tend
to bootstrap their businesses a
little bit
better.
And so, in the long run, what
that means is
that they tend to survive, and
they may not
grow as rapidly, but they tend
to be more
sustainable in certain ways.
ANGEL RICH: When you look at
sort of spheres
of influence when you are
raising money, it
really comes down to sort of who
you know
and who you have access to.
So, I'm hopeful that, in the
future, those
pipelines will be opened up more
to diverse
communities and the black
population in general.
APRIL BROWN: Back in the Bay
Area, Oneva is
ramping up to potentially serve
more families
like the Santoses.
The company recently signed a
deal with a
Seattle-based Fortune 50 tech
firm that will
offer the service as a wellness
benefit to
employees, no up-front money for
Oneva, but
immediate access to thousands of
potential
clients.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
April Brown in
San Francisco.
GWEN IFILL: Now back to the
campaign, this
time through the eyes of a
highly influential
columnist who says she's never
seen anything
like it.
I sat down recently with New
York Times writer
Maureen Dowd about her new book,
"The Year
of Voting Dangerously."
It is the latest addition to our
series Political
Ink.
You say, after years of covering
these people,
that President Obama is too
cool, Hillary
Clinton is too cold, and Donald
Trump is way
too hot.
What's a voter to do?
MAUREEN DOWD, Columnist, The New
York Times:
Where were you when I was
writing my book
blurb?
That's perfect.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Huh?
MAUREEN DOWD: Yes.
That's the wild thing about this
election
year.
It's like the revenge of the
'90s.
All of those characters we
started with are
back, you know, in different
capacities.
Bill is back as first lady.
Monica Lewinsky is back as a
bullying advocate
-- anti-advocate.
And, you know, Hillary is back.
Rudy Giuliani is back.
Newt Gingrich is back.
Seinfeld back, in the sense that
Steve Bannon,
who's running Trump's campaign,
made all his
money from Seinfeld.
GWEN IFILL: Oh, they're all
back.
MAUREEN DOWD: They're all back.
GWEN IFILL: Well, as I read this
book -- and
a lot of it is columns of yours
I have read,
one...
MAUREEN DOWD: And Trump.
GWEN IFILL: And Trump, of
course.
MAUREEN DOWD: Sorry.
GWEN IFILL: One at a time.
One at a time.
But when I read them again
altogether, I come
away with the impression you
don't like any
of these people.
MAUREEN DOWD: Well, actually, I
start out
kind of gushing about Barack
Obama and Hillary.
Some of the people who have
interviewed me
said it sounded like you had a
girl crush
on her in the beginning.
GWEN IFILL: in the beginning.
MAUREEN DOWD: Because, when I
covered her
as the spouse of Bill Clinton
running in '92,
I was super supportive.
And I talked about what a
tightrope the first
lady job is, because women like
Hillary and
Michelle have the same
educational credentials
as their husbands, and then they
have got
to go into these antediluvian,
antiquated
role of the first lady.
And I remember, when Hillary,
during the campaign,
got delivered stationery, and
they had dropped
the Rodham from her name, and
she got all
upset and sent it back.
And so the beginning columns
were supportive.
And then...
GWEN IFILL: Same thing with
Barack Obama.
MAUREEN DOWD: Yes.
But, with health care, also, I
was so glowing
about her when she went up to
the Hill to
present health care.
But then she began the pattern
that has proved
to be so destructive to her to
this day, where
she just builds a wall of
secrecy and defensiveness
and blocking out the press and
my way or the
highway.
And that's the pattern that's
been repeated
again and again.
It doesn't help her.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask you about
something
that President Obama said
recently at a fund-raiser
in New York about Hillary
Clinton.
He said: "This shouldn't be a
close election,
but it will be.
And the reason it will be is not
because of
Hillary's flaws."
He went on to say, it's about
sexism.
MAUREEN DOWD: Right.
Well, I think that the election
of the first
African-American president and
now the first
woman running on a major party
ticket has
definitely stirred up a lot of
racism and
sexism.
And, in some ways, this election
is the primal
scream and death rattle of, you
know, white
men running America.
But I also think that Barack
Obama set a tone
where he never talked about
things as racist,
even when they really were
racist.
And I think that would be a good
model for
Hillary, even though, when I
watch Donald
Trump rallies on YouTube, and I
see the scroll
of running comments, they are so
nefarious
and vicious, I just want to run
and sign up
for a Hillary -- you know, to
lick envelopes
for Hillary.
Do they lick envelopes anymore?
GWEN IFILL: I don't think so.
MAUREEN DOWD: Send e-mails for
Hillary, because
they're so nasty.
So, a lot of that has been
stirred up.
But, on the other hand, I think
she would
be better off not calling sexism
and modeling
herself on the way Obama didn't
call racism.
GWEN IFILL: Who would you say
you have admired
over the years in politics?
You speak kindly of George H.W.
Bush.
You speak kindly of Joe Biden.
MAUREEN DOWD: Yes.
It's hard, because I think I
don't really
want to be the kind of
economist, like Stewart
Alsop in the old days, or Scotty
Reston, who
really wanted to be friends with
politicians
and go to dinner parties with
them.
I mean, I think of myself as the
watchdog,
which creates problems sometimes
with "Times"
readers, because I'm not coming
from the left
or the right.
I'm treating it more like a
political reporter.
GWEN IFILL: You are a Washington
native, something
a lot of people don't know about
you.
So you have watched the city not
only as a
collection of marble buildings,
but also as
a community.
How has politics changed, how
has Washington
changed in your years as an
armchair observer,
as it were?
MAUREEN DOWD: Oh.
Well, you know, when I went to
see George
H.W. Bush for lunch a few years
ago, I think
he was just appalled at what had
happened,
because he was a bipartisan, and
he believed
in everyone working together and
civility.
And so I think it was very hard
for him to
even fathom the kind of politics
that is being
played nowadays.
And I hope he doesn't tune in to
the debates
because he can't stand Donald
Trump.
He called him an epithet when I
was at lunch
with him.
GWEN IFILL: Oh, my.
MAUREEN DOWD: And that was
before Donald Trump
eviscerated Jeb.
So, it's much coarser.
And I'm not sure if what that
leads to is
a lot of other celebrities
jumping in, because
they think, if Donald Trump can
do it, I can
do it, and then we have kind of
a "Dancing
with the Stars," kind of B- and
C-level celebrities
jumping into every race from now
on, or if
this will cause people to snap
out of it and
try and get more high-toned
candidates.
GWEN IFILL: Whether the
candidates become
more high-tone enough, it's
still tough for
the voters.
The name of your book is "The
Year of Voting
Dangerously."
And it's worth it just for the
cover, actually,
"The Derangement of American
Politics."
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Maureen.
MAUREEN DOWD: Thanks, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.